There was an increasing amount of anti-military
feeling in America at that time.
What were your feelings toward that
anti-military feeling, and was there anything
that your
department did to combat it or alleviate that
feeling? Well, of course, my concern was
with the Congress officially. As I mentioned, I
think the vast majority of the members of
Congress, when I first entered this office and
became an observer of the scene with the Congress,
were in solid support of the Vietnam War, and every
vote they took reflected that on a related issue. I
think by the time of this period you're talking
about, by the end of 1970, only the minority really
was there. And as you know, it wasn't long until
congressional actions were being taken to really
cut off the support for the Department of War. But
everyone in the Army had to be conscious of this
problem and concerned with it.
The disenchantment of the people, particularly
the youth, is true. It can't help the Army. You can
only hurt. But what do you do about it? Really, it
was a disenchantment with the Vietnam War. And of
course, the people who were conducting the war
were in uniform. And I don't think that it's
entirely fair
So much criticism fell upon the military who were
there doing the job as they were instructed to do
it. But nevertheless, it's understandable, I
think. And we saw, of course, very serious
results of that feeling. And I think the most
serious that's going to affect us the most for the
longest was the discontinuance of selective
service. And President Nixon came to the
conclusion that that selective service system
had to be discontinued. And I think he came to that
conclusion basically for two reasons. One, there
was such opposition to military service,
particularly among the youth. And it certainly
had been demonstrated in those years of the
Vietnam War. And two, I think there were some
proper concern that a selective service system
could not be conducted fairly.
How can you be just? It had gotten into so many
exceptions, you know. Sure. And the only reason
you can justify those exceptions is because you
don't need everybody anyway. Right. And, but the
great cost of this, in my opinion, was evident from
the time the decision, before the decision was
actually made. Now, I didn't feel strong enough
about this that I would revolt over it. And I don't
think General Westmoreland liked the idea at the
time. But when the decision was made, those senior
military people and secretaries of the services
set out to make a volunteer service work. But to me,
and I said so at the time, the main hurt is not going
to be the loss of that selection of men. Perhaps
enough bodies can be attracted into the services
to man them, and man them properly even. We didn't
know at that time. But clearly, what we stand to
lose most is the contact with the American people
and their involvement in national security
directly and what I mean is that when Johnny Doe was
drafted
almost inevitably I guess the sun is over the yard
arm or whatever
when Johnny though he was drafted, Mom and Papa
almost inevitably wanted to know, why Johnny? Why
does Johnny have to go? And Grandma and Grandpa
felt the same way, and maybe brothers and sisters
and aunts and uncles. Well, also, almost
inevitably, after Johnny had been in a while, and
they'd visited him at training camp and visited
him in his outfit maybe, Johnny had learned why,
and they learned why. We have to draft people
because we have to have that much strength to meet
our military commitments. Now I'm not talking
about Vietnam specifically, I'm talking about in
general. So not only Johnny, but his mom and dad and
grandma and grandpa and aunts and uncles and
brothers and sisters were involved.
And they became informed. And this was extremely
important to our, not just demanding the army, but
important to our entire foreign policy and
ability to carry it out. We've lost that. The
minute the people were told that they were going to
pay for an army, they might pay more. But they were
going to use volunteers. They disconnected
themselves from those concerns and those
attachments. Don't worry about it. Just pay for
it. Sure. Many people feel that they bought
security,
that they were buying security, but they weren't.
They were simply buying a peacetime service. And
there's going to be a great shock if and when we have
another crisis that requires significant
mobilization and the Johnnies are drafted again.
Because a lot of people have just put it out of their
minds. Now,
the question is, can we withstand that shock? And I
don't know. To tell you the truth, I don't know.
When you combine that with
the fact that
we have fully accepted, as a nation of people,
defeat at arms in Vietnam, we've long grown to
accept a draw in Korea. And we think we've bought
security when we haven't.
The real question in my mind with regard to our
national security is, do the people of this
country have the will to provide for their
security?
And that worries me. I think we can have the best
equipment in the world, But if we don't have a
willing and determined hand on the trigger, it
doesn't mean a thing.
So we've got a lot of
determination to be built back, I think. And I
think the best thing that came out of that tragic
and frustrating incident of our hostages being
taken in Iran was the indication that the people do
of this country do still have a feeling of
patriotism and that's encouraging so maybe all we
need to do is be put to the test but I'm very
concerned that we've lost contact with
international affairs and national security
directly as families we think we bought security
that we haven't we have found it comfortable to
accept a defeat and perfectly acceptable to
accept a draw so why where and when are we going to be
determined to win again what about testifying in
front of Congress you must have done that on a
fairly frequent basis is that true that's not
True, Terry. I very carefully avoided that. Yeah,
did you let the Secretary of the Army do that
instead? We used the Secretary of the Army, the
Chief of Staff, and other chiefs, and commanders.
Now, the reason I avoided that is that I could lose
one case or be, you know, then I'd be ineffective as
Chief of Legislative Liaison. Right. In fact, I
testified only one time concerning whether
senior officers should be permitted to be trained
as pilots to fly Army aircraft. What was your
opinion? My opinion was that they should. And it
was a rather interesting thing. Incidentally,
the Congress won on that one. but our Secretary of
the Army their opinion was no Congress's opinion
was no yeah we had had a program by which officers
would be chosen as senior lieutenant colonels or
colonels officers who were promising this had
been going on for 20 years uh well it had been going
on actually for about 10 years when Vietnam when we
started moving into Vietnam those officers would
be chosen to be
necessarily but because they were promising
officers who it appeared were going to go places
and aviation was becoming more and more important
in the Army and so we ought to have more senior
officers from the combat arms particularly who
are moving forward in grade and responsibility
acquainted with the capability and limitations
and the potential for the use of Army aviation
That's the theory behind it. Anyway, that served
us very well in Vietnam because we expanded Army
aviation so greatly, not only in this 1st Cavalry
Division, air assault, but also the 101st
Airborne Division became an air assault
division, and every division over there used
aviation. What about inter-service rivalry
between pilots in the Army and the Air Force? Was
that a factor? No, not really. But I'll very
briefly cover that incident. The Congress wanted
to cut out this program of training senior
officers. And the Secretary of the Army and the
Chief of Staff were defending it, of course. I
just wanted to very briefly tell this little story
because it's a little bit interesting. Secretary
of the Army and Chief of Staff kind of saw that they
were losing the argument on whether to continue
this training of senior officers so that they
could understand aviation. When they got higher
command, they could use it better. And General
Westmoreland turned to me and said, Bill, General
Becker, I think he said, you tell the members of the
committee what you think about this because
you're a product of the system. And that was true. I
learned to fly after I was nominated promotion of
Brigadier General, because the general officers
in that Air Assault Division were all pilots, and I
wanted to stay. So you learned to fly a helicopter
then? I learned to fly a helicopter, and I took the
authority of the Chief of Staff of the Army to allow
me to learn on the job. And then when I came home for a
brief leave, I split leave with training at Fort
Rucker, our aviation center, and then went and
returned to the division and finished my
training.
I thought I gave them a good argument, but we in the
end lost. But to me, I was in a position of telling
people where to go and what to do in aircraft, and
when I learned to fly and went through the rigors
of—by the way, when I was at Fort Rucker, they made
me fly as many hours as I could do it because I was
there just for a short time. Of course, I had some
ground instructions. But they really worked me to
the point of fatigue.
They had an excellent training program there
specially made up for me. I had learned in Vietnam,
and the classroom emphasizes it, of course, how
important this maintenance is. And all you have to
do is see a disaster that's a maintenance fault to
realize what the responsibility for maintenance
is. So anyway, I outlined to them that
First of all, you need people who are basically
oriented not on aviation but on the combat arms to
qualify at some point in aviation and learn the
potential of it. If you've got a man that's done
nothing but fly, and the Army didn't have many of
those, but he's not the man you need to put in a
position of command in this expanded use of
aviation. Well, when I learned to fly, I not only
filled a cockpit, which was unimportant, but I
did. I relieved another pilot. I had a co-pilot.
But I knew in a much better defined way what I could
ask people to do or expect people to do in terms of
flying so many hours in certain conditions. I knew
much better whether you could land on that rough
hilltop or not, and therefore whether you should
order them to do so. And I had a much greater respect
for the maintenance of that aircraft. And I said,
beyond that, if you're flying alone in an
aircraft, for example, on this maintenance,
you're very conscious of it, solo fires
particularly. But I pointed out that when I joined
the 1st Cavalry Division in 1941, everybody was on
a horse. And the commanders, particularly the
senior commanders, All the soldiers, well every
commander, the soldiers expected that commander
to be a good horseman. And can you imagine being in a
horse-cower division and not being able to ride a
horse? Well what's different in the flying
aerosol division? What did the congressman
think? Money? Money. Dollars were the answer. And
of course at some point dollars always have to be
the limit, you know. but anyway as a result that I
thought very vital program was discontinued.
You had another question. Yeah, I had some other
questions about that job. Congressman, who were
the- you dealt with the congressmen all the time.
Who did you consider your friends from 68 to 70? Who
were your enemies as far as the military was
concerned? Who were people that would work for the
armed services, and who were people who wouldn't?
Well, I don't think we really had any enemies.
Surprisingly enough,
the members of the armed services committees in
the House and the Senate, the members of the armed
services appropriations subcommittees in the
House and the Senate, felt very much the same
responsibilities as our senior military leaders
and secretaries felt. And they felt
that they had to prepare themselves to present an
authorization bill on the floor of the House and
the Senate that they can justify and that they can
back up and that they can win with. That's exactly
what we've come to the Congress with to those
committees. Now, we have to sell to the
committees, and then they have to sell to their own
house of the Congress on the Senate floor. So we're
really, now they're not yes men by any means. No
way. But it's interesting that those committees
are a continuation of the process that we go
through and a continuation of the responsibility
felt the security of the nation that our military
and civilian defense leaders feel. So you had
close cooperation and coordination with those
people. So we worked with them. You bet. But they'd
challenge us any time. And any one of them could
challenge us on a point or a program or whatever.
Who'd you have a lot of respect for? Which one of the
senators and congressmen? Well, I couldn't name
them all. Let me just say this. First of all, of
course, the chairman at the time I was there of the
Armed Services Committee was Senator Russell,
briefly. Succeeded by a no. He had just moved to
appropriate. Senator John Stennis of
Mississippi and Congressman Mendel Rivers of
South Carolina was the House Committee chairman.
We
in the Army have always felt the Congress was not an
obstructionist organization, but they were so
that blame slow that they were sometimes
discouraging.
After two and a plus years of working with them and
observing this process in actuality,
I wound up with a tremendous respect for the
Congress. Well, first of all, for our total
system. I think the concept that
our framers of the Constitution had was
absolutely tremendous, and of course that's not a
new observation.
The military men tend to be standing off from this
and not particularly understanding it, but it
works very well. And the Congress itself, I left
with a much vaster understanding of it and a very
high regard for it. And the members of Congress,
by and large, they're very hardworking people. I
don't know of a body of people that work any harder,
contrary to some popular belief. They're
very conscientious. and they are there to serve
the best interests of the United States, the
people of the United States, and there's no doubt
in my mind about it. Now, we see the crook
occasionally, and we see the deviate
occasionally, but as I've often said, if you threw
a fishnet over a hundred people in Kauffman,
Texas, and then looked at them individually,
there were two or three of them you would not want to
keep. And I think the same thing is just about in the
same proportion in the Congress. There's two or
three percent of them that we shouldn't keep. But I
felt that there's
absolutely nothing I would change except, if I
could influence it, I would change the
tediousness and the time-consuming process,
just as I've criticized the decision, the
slowness in decision time in the Army, or the
Office of the Department of Defense. That's the
only thing I would like to see change. So you had
real close cooperation with congressmen. Oh,
yes. We had our critics, of course, and we had our
incidents, and we had our bad news out of them. but
they're all very conscious of their
responsibility for national security. Okay, you
were in this job when President Nixon was just
elected. Did you have an opportunity to meet the
President? No, I never met Mr. Nixon personally.
I've been in audience a time or two. For example,
he came to the Pentagon shortly after he was
inaugurated and made a talk to the General
officer, general and flag officers, and
secretary level people. And I must say I was
impressed. And when you look back in retrospect,
Mr. Nixon's long suit was foreign policy and
national strategy.
Why'd you resign from this job? That sounds like a
fascinating job. I didn't resign. I retired.
Well, that's what I meant. Yeah, Terry, I got you on
a technicality there. As a matter of fact, I'm
still, I was not, I didn't leave the Army. I was
reassigned to the retired list, technically. I
could be called tomorrow if they wanted me and
needed me. Well, you had 1968 major general and two
years later, then you retire. You had a number of
years that you could have served. Yes, that's
true. Why did you decide to retire then in 1970?
Well, yes, I'd be glad to respond to that. It was not
an easy decision, and we decided, Fran and I, gosh,
I guess ten years before, decided
that, really, we can go the 30 years in the Army, but
we surely shouldn't go further given the ages of
our children and the stages of life they'll be in,
ready to start college at the end of that term. We
started our family a little late, as you see. That
was a conclusion we reached. I shouldn't have
called that a decision. In Yugoslavia, then? We
were at that time, I believe- at the War College,
really you might say right up at the top of our
career. And I don't know whether I've said this in
this interview, but I think it's appropriate to
say that we certainly did not leave the Army
because we were unhappy or dissatisfied or
anything. As a matter of fact, both of us will say
that we never I can say I never had a bad assignment.
And she would say, since we've been married, she
never has experienced a bad assignment. And in
thirty years, the last five months, I had one son of
a bitch box, I think I've said that. We're going to
get him, why don't you? And that's a pretty good
record. Were you going to name him, or do you want to
keep him? No, I'm not going to name him. Yeah, we're
going to leave him alone. I think I'm very
fortunate. I would say absolutely.
Now having arrived where we were in the Pentagon,
and as we approached our 30th year, we began
thinking about this again. That was a fascinating
assignment, and I don't know what was ahead, but we
felt we should come to grips with this thing, and
some of the contributing factors to our thinking
was that this was really a very unpleasant time for
our children. We were living, it appeared, in a
very select location in Washington. We were
quartered at Fort Myer, Virginia, very near the
Pentagon, beautiful situation. Our children
were being bused to schools in Arlington, which
for years had been considered the finest school
system in the nation. And some of the things that
had happened to our children, which were by plays
from integration, were just almost unbearable to
me. The children didn't bother them that much. So I
guess this kind of got us, this didn't cause us to
leave, but it caused us to think again about this.
And we could visualize that upon completion of
this tour, Our oldest son was, we had two sons, two
daughters. Our oldest son was a freshman in A&M at
the time I retired. We could be sent to Timbuktu or
the back end of Turkey with these four children at
these ages and say have one in college in the United
States and one in high school in Switzerland and
American school in Ankara and us out at the back
end. And so family became the real consideration
here. And
family had always been extremely important to me
for reasons you've learned here. And I've
mentioned here that my children are fifth
generation on this, fifth generation backers on
this land here. So I had to satisfy myself that I had
fulfilled my duty. I could have remained another
five years beyond the date of my retirement. Five
and a half years.
And maybe another promotion. Possibly another
promotion. That was not a serious consideration.
I was absolutely convinced the Vietnam War was
over with as far as resolving it in our favor was
concerned. And so I felt that obligation had been
met. I had served there a year and a half.
I felt that I wasn't that essential to the Army.
We had all kinds of highly qualified people coming
on. I'd had the privilege of sitting on general
officer promotion boards, selecting officers
for promotion in general, which is a very
difficult thing to do.
But it was a very satisfying
experience because
We could actually only select at that time for
promotion a fraction of those who obviously were
qualified. Well, you see, that's pretty
comforting for the future of the nation. And so
that's sort of a thing I rationalized. As a matter
of fact,
each month the general officer in the Army get a
listing of all general officers and where they
stand on the promotion list and where they are. you
know, their assignments. And I, while I was doing
this contemplating, I happened to pick that up one
day and I started looking at it with a new
perspective.
I found among
the listed major generals and brigadier
generals, I counted 25 that
I felt I had been instrumental in promoting. by my
reports on them. So that made it easy. I'd replaced
myself 25 times, you see. And by the way, one of the
officers on that list is General Shia Meyer, who's
now Chief of Staff of the Army. So anyway, after all
these considerations, but basically with the
view to keeping our family together, and getting
them on home ground and letting their roots grow
here,
we decided we'd retire. We'd be moved to the
retired list, and that's what we did. Did you ever
find out what your next assignment might have
been?
Yes. Not specifically, but I was
I was told that I was to receive command of a
division when I left the Pentagon, that I had been
tentatively placed on that list, and that was very
gratifying to hear that. Because you had never
had... I had never been assigned as commander of a
division. I'd been assistant division commander
of the 1st Cavalry, and I commanded it
temporarily, but that's not the same. Well, of
course, that was rather enticing, but we'd made
our decision. And I might say, for whatever it was
worth, and I'm not sure what it was worth, I
commented on it in response, that I'd always had
the objective of being a division commander. And
that's one specific objective that I had had. And I
wasn't disenchanted or out
of sorts because I hadn't gotten one, but I pointed
out, that in my experience in World War II in
Vietnam, I was absolutely convinced that the Army
should never assign an officer to command a
division if he's over 50 years old. Now, that's an
arbitrary thing to say, but I felt it should be, if
much over 40, not much. How old were you at that
time? I was 51. So did you feel yourself that you
were too old to command the division? I felt I
didn't put it that way. But I did leave the thought
that they should assign younger officers to
command divisions. Because the older we get,
whether we really are ready to admit it or not, the
mechanism is such that we become more
conservative in our thinking and certainly more
conservative in our doing. And the division, and
by the way, this age thing relates right on down, in
my opinion. The division is
the optimum combined arms unit of the Army that
brings all capabilities into play at the first
time, first point. And those are very critical
people, those guys that command divisions. And my
observation of World War II at Vietnam was that
those who were nearest to 40 were the finest
commanders. I don't know whether that was taken
seriously or not, but I did note after leaving that
many of them were young 40s who were assigned,
mid-40s. Now, that's not so much of you're
deciding to do it, but it's a function, really, of
the cycle in age versus grade in the Army, which is
basically determined by wars, really. Do you
remember the day that you retired? Very well. Tell
me about it. Well,
I had been offered a retirement ceremony at Fort
Myer with the Old Guard 3rd Infantry Division
during the honors. That was normal for a senior
officer retiring from the Pentagon. That was the
ceremonial unit there. And I declined
gratefully,
saying that I felt it appropriate only to retire
with the unit ceremony if it were my unit.
So, the retirement ceremony itself was held in the
office of the Secretary of the Army, and Fran was
there. The
Secretary of the Army and the Chief of Staff and his
assistant Chiefs of Staff and a few of my special
friends were there for the ceremony. And it was
very simple, but very nice. It sounds like it was
very nice. Very nice. And I would love to have been
retired at a union ceremony, but I honestly have
always said,
I don't want those fellows to be called out to march
for me unless they've been my troops. Yeah. What
were your feelings on that day? Well, we've never
looked back on that decision, honestly. We've
missed the Army a great deal. But of course, that is
a, that's kind of like, to some degree, kind of like
that final review at A&M, you know. It's a great
chance. It's quite a partition.
But we miss the Army often, and I think that's good.
But we've never regretted this decision. As a
matter of fact,
these four kids of ours, we've succeeded maybe too
well, in a sense, in getting this roots growing and
orientation at home here. Fran and I have liked it.
We thought we'd never get Chris out of the house.
But they have become very attached to the point
that
perhaps there are better opportunities for them
elsewhere, but they all determined to stay right
around here. Our oldest son lives and works in
Kauffman, and our younger son lives out here
across the road from us and works in Kauffman. Our
baby daughter just graduated from Sam Houston
State University, just gone to work in Dallas, but
she doesn't want to live further away than Dallas.
She would like to move closer to her work there. And
our older daughter is out at Woodville and can't
come home often enough with her two youngsters. So
that's been very gratifying. Incidentally, both
our boys went to A&M. Chris didn't graduate, but
they're also A&M products.
Very avid Aggies. There's only two things more
that I'd like to talk about. And one is leadership,
and one is the two more things. One's leadership,
and one is the change. Another is the changes that
have taken place at A&M. Now I was wondering if
you'd define leadership for me.
Well, I'm sure there are different ways to define
leadership. But to me, leadership is the
demonstrated capacity to cause men to perform in
the accomplishment of an objective, whether they
really are
fully oriented or not. The better you are in them,
the better it is. It's causing things to happen,
and happen correctly. Is that motivation?
Motivation, when you start dissecting this
leadership, I think
it's in many parts.
By the way, I don't think leaders are born, I think
they're made. I think leaders are made through a
series of accumulating experiences, dealing
with others and causing others to act. and
growing situations of magnitude and
responsibility and so forth.
Personality, of course, has something to do with
it. I think in terms of leadership, character is
very important for the leader to have and show
without, you know, to be observed without him
showing it off. I think knowledge of what you're
about has got to be an extremely important aspect
of it. Of course, in military leadership,
the ability to make decisions,
useful and sound decisions, in a timely way is very
important. You know, it's an interesting thing.
most difficult thing for some leaders is to make a
decision.
Now maybe we're getting back into this matter of
conservatism versus risk, but leadership is
something that you don't really develop so
consciously by preparation, but by experience.
almost has to be successful experience and
accumulation of successful experiences to
really be a top leader.
I'm not saying that a failure is not acceptable. It
is. Most of us fail at something. Sure. Is there a
difference between military leadership and
civilian leadership, do you think? I think
they're basically the same. I think they're
different in you know, and the objectives that
are... What type of values should a leader have?
What type of values? Well, that's a good point.
That comes under character. I think that a leader
has to be a man of high moral values. He's got to be
just. My experience is that you can be just as tough
as you want to be, as long as what you require your
people to do is achievable and you're fair with
them in doing that.
So you have to be fair and just. How about flexible?
Well, I think... You have to have knowledge.
Flexibility, that's true, because situations
change, but also you should be flexible in mind to
the extent that you can accept... advice,
recommendations, and new information that leads
to your decisions.
Flexibility is, of course, we can describe that
against various terms, and when you get to the
battlefield, it's a must. It's an absolute must.
Are the people that become leaders in the
military, are they people who are the most capable
people? Well, this is sort of what we were talking
about before. Are they the most capable or is it
fate? Right there at the right time or is it a
combination? What was more important in your
life? I think it's a combination. As you can see, if
you're at the right place at the right time, you've
still got to perform. But if you don't get to that
place, you're not seen. You're not given the
opportunity to perform. And there's some
variation and, of course,
significance of jobs. And much of that is a matter
of chance. Well, that leads to another question.
In a bureaucracy like a corporation or the
military, you feel that leaders are basically the
same. Do you think that people advance because of
their own work or because there's somebody else
that's helping them along, or why? Well, there's
no question but what people you've convinced on
your own capabilities can help you. But at the same
time, I'd hasten to add that I never considered
what has been referred to as politics in the Army as
being really significant. I don't think it is. Who
you know is helpful in many cases, particularly
after you become senior and you do know more people
and more people know you. But I don't think that's
essential at all. Now, where it is helpful is like
when you get, for example, when a general officer
takes command of a division, or a corps, or a higher
headquarters. Oftentimes, he's given some
leeway in the selection of his staff or his
subordinate commanders. In peacetime, it's not
very great. In fact, it's almost nil in most
situations. In wartime, it makes more
difference. If he's got three records or resumes
of officers in front of him, and he knows one of
them, and the records look about the same, who's he
going to take? Sure. And to that extent, it makes a
difference. Oftentimes, a senior commander, a
senior general officer, having had experience
with people, he'll just recall them and send a
message watching, I'd like to have Joe Doakes to be
my brigade commander. And this will work to some
degree, but I don't think that that's the
determination. Primarily, you feel it's the
individual's record of work. I think so. You made
general officer, which is the highest grade that
you can make in the military. Would you consider
yourself, or did you consider yourself during
your career an ambitious officer? No, I didn't. In
this regard, if we mean that I said I'm going to be a
general officer, I never did. I had always felt
that I'd like to be, but at the same time I realized I
was going to get there one grade at a time if I got
there. No, I think my orientation accepted me to do
the best job I could when I had the job. Well, when
you were 25, for example, did you say to yourself
someday, and by that time you'd made up your mind
you wanted a military career, someday I want to
become a general officer. That's my goal? No, I
never said that's my goal. I always felt that
that's really the top. Sure, I'm going to keep
moving in that direction as long as I can. And did
you feel once you became general officer, once you
became a brigadier, did you feel that now that you
were a general that your expectations of what
generals are like Do you think that you had a good
idea what kind of a status a general has? Was it
reinforced or was it refuted? No, to a great extent
I had an understanding.